Eva Noertoft, Raquel Joseph, Arieta Haskaj

APUSH Review

Period 1 (1491 – 1607)
Key Concept 1.1: As native populations migrated and settled across the vast expanse of North America over time, they developed distinct and increasingly complex societies by adapting to and transforming their diverse environments.

Key Concept 1.2: Contact among Europeans, Native Americans, and Africans resulted in the Columbian Exchange and significant social, cultural, and political changes on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean.

Period 2 (1607-1754)
Key Concept 2.1: Europeans developed a variety of colonization and migration patterns, influenced by different imperial goals, cultures, and the varied North American environments where they settled, and they competed with each other and American Indians for resources.

Key Concept 2.2: The British colonies participated in political, social, cultural, and economic exchanges with Great Britain that encouraged both stronger bonds with Britain and resistance to Britain’s control.

Key Concept 2.3: European colonization efforts in North America stimulated intercultural contact and intensified conflict between the various groups of colonizers and native peoples.

Period 3 (1754-1800)
Key Concept 3.1: British attempts to assert tighter control over its North American colonies and the colonial resolve to pursue self-government led to a colonial independence movement and the Revolutionary War.

Key Concept 3.2: The American Revolution’s democratic and republican ideals inspired new experiments with different forms of government.

Key Concept 3.3: Migration within North America and competition over resources, boundaries, and trade intensified conflicts among peoples and nations.

Period 4 (1800-1848)
Key Concept 4.1: The United States began to develop a modern democracy and celebrated a new national culture, while Americans sought to define the nation’s democratic ideals and change their society and institutions to match them.

Key Concept 4.2: Innovations in technology, agriculture, and commerce powerfully accelerated the American economy, precipitating profound changes to U.S. society and to national and regional identities.

Key Concept 4.3: The U.S. interest in increasing foreign trade and expanding its national borders shaped the nation’s foreign policy and spurred government and private initiatives.

Period 5 (1844-1877)
Key Concept 5.1: The United States became more connected with the world, pursued an expansionist foreign policy in the Western Hemisphere, and emerged as the destination for many migrants from other countries.

Key Concept 5.2: Intensified by expansion and deepening regional divisions, debates over slavery and other economic, cultural, and political issues led the nation into civil war.

Key Concept 5.3: The Union victory in the Civil War and the contested reconstruction of the South settled the issues of slavery and secession, but left unresolved many questions about the power of the federal government and citizenship rights.

Period 6 (1865-1898)
Key Concept 6.1: Technological advances, large-scale production methods, and the opening of new markets encouraged the rise of industrial capitalism in the United States.

Key Concept 6.2: The migrations that accompanied industrialization transformed both urban and rural areas of the United States and caused dramatic social and cultural change.

Key Concept 6.3: The Gilded Age produced new cultural and intellectual movements, public reform efforts, and political debates over economic and social policies.

Period 7 (1890-1945)
Key Concept 7.1: Growth expanded opportunity, while economic instability led to new efforts to reform U.S. society and its economic system.

Key Concept 7.2: Innovations in communications and technology contributed to the growth of mass culture, while significant changes occurred in internal and international migration patterns.

Key Concept 7.3: Participation in a series of global conflicts propelled the United States into a position of international power while renewing domestic debates over the nation’s proper role in the world.

Period 8 (1945-1980)
Key Concept 8.1: The United States responded to an uncertain and unstable postwar world by asserting and working to maintain a position of global leadership, with far-reaching domestic and international consequences.

Key Concept 8.2: New movements for civil rights and liberal efforts to expand the role of government generated a range of political and cultural responses.

Key Concept 8.3: Postwar economic and demographic changes had far-reaching consequences for American society, politics, and culture.

http://www.drurban.info/uploads/2/4/4/9/24492964/apush_big_study_guide.pdf
https://ap.gilderlehrman.org/period/1
https://secure-media.collegeboard.org/digitalServices/pdf/ap/ap-us-history-course-and-exam-description.pdf



Pd. 7
Assimilation is the process of becoming “American”. Second generation immigrants were more likely to assimilate than first generation. This was often because public schools only taught in English, so they were forced to learn and speak the language.
The “City Beautiful” Movement developed in Chicago at the 1893 World’s Fair. It was inspired by Daniel Burnham and the goal was to impose order and symmetry on the disordered life and structure of cities.
Tenements were houses in which immigrants often lived, and they became known as slum houses. These were located in cities and had poor living conditions.
Jacob Riis was a famous photographer who photographed tenement houses in NYC. It was entitled How The Other Half Lives, and it exposed the poor conditions immigrants were living in.
Tammany Hall was a political machine that provided jobs and assistance to constituents. It did so by giving groceries or money for rent. This gained loyalty for the political party.
William M. Tweed, also known as “Boss” Tweed, stole about $200 million through fraud. He helped control elections and was ultimately captured.
Department Stores began to develop such as Woolworth’s (dry goods store), Montgomery Ward and Sears Roebuck catalogs (mail-order catalogs), which helped farmers, and Macy’s. As a result, small businesses were affected and women began advocating for consumer protection and improvement in wages and working conditions.
Movies were silent until the 1920s, and provided leisure for people.
D.W. Griffith made the movie The Birth of a Nation, which glorified the KKK, making it seem like an appealing group.
Newspaper Chains began to grow during this time. This allowed for the creation of “yellow journalism”.
Social Realism attempted to recreate the realities of urban social life through literature. This was often done through somber stories of the oppressed urban poor to draw attention to social injustices.
Upton Sinclair wrote The Jungle, a book that exposed the horrors of the meatpacking industry. It aided in the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act and the Meat Inspection Act.
The Ashcan School was an art school that focused on artwork depicting urban life.
Darwinism, or the theory of evolution, challenged religion and schools at this time.
Half-Breeds were Republicans that favored reform in the government. They were led by James Blaine.
The Pendleton Act was passed in 1883 and it required a civil service exam for federal government jobs. This limited patronage and was passed as a result of James Arthur’s assassination.
The Sherman Antitrust Act was passed in 1890, and was supposed to break up monopolies. However, it actually broke up unions.
William McKinley became president in 1896. He was a Republican, and he created the McKinley Tariff (1890), which raised taxes.
The Interstate Commerce Act outlawed higher rates for short hauls for railroads and railroads had to publish their rates.
The Grange provided social and economic opportunities for farmers. They sought to end monopolies in the railroad and wanted government ownership of businesses. 
The Populist Party (People’s) incorporated the ideas of farmers. The Omaha Platform by Ignatius Donnelly advocated for: free and unlimited silver coinage at a ratio of 16:1; a gradual income tax; government ownership of the telephone, telegraph, and railroads; limiting government land grants to settlers over railroads; direct election of senators; and a postal savings bank.
The Panic of 1893 was caused by over speculation, stock-market crash, and overproduction. As a result of the panic, the government repeals the Sherman Silver Act.
Jacob Coxey led what was known as “Coxey’s Army”. They advocated for a public works program and marched a group of unemployed people to Washington, but were ultimately broken up by police.
“Free Silver” was the idea of having silver to back the dollar at a ratio of 16:1. This would increase the money supply, helping farmers and debtors.
William Jennings Bryan won the Democratic nomination for presidency in 1896 and challenged McKinley. He ran for president three times, but was never elected. He advocated for lowering the tariff.
Imperialism is the belief in conquering other countries to benefit your own country. The U.S. began to consider imperialism because manifest destiny was complete as a result of the frontier being “closed”. The White Man’s Burden encouraged imperialism, stating that it was the duty of the U.S. to civilize non-western areas.
Alfred Thayer Mahan wrote a book called Influence of Sea Power. He argued that control of the sea was vital for world dominance. As a result, the U.S. and other countries began building up their navies.
Hawaii was attractive to the U.S. because it had large sugar production. The U.S. wanted to annex Hawaii and many farmers moved there to grow sugar. In 1890, the tariff exemption on Hawaii ended, resulting in high prices on imports. This hurt U.S. farmers that were living in Hawaii. Queen Liliuokalani believed that native Hawaiians should control the islands, but she was overthrown, and McKinley eventually signed the treaty to annex Hawaii.
The Cuban Revolt occurred in 1895 when Cuba revolted against Spain. They followed a scorched-earth policy, meaning they destroy everything in order to hurt Spain economically. The U.S. was concerned because of investments and trade. The Spanish tried to crush the rebellion and the Spanish minister spoke negatively about McKinley. The USS Maine, stationed in Cuba, blew up and killed 260 sailers. This called for U.S. involvement in the war, so McKinley sent a message to Congress on April 11, 1898 urging war with Spain. The Teller Amendment promised Cubans that once the Spanish were overthrown, Cubans would gain their freedom. On August 12, 1898, an armistice was signed that ended the war. About 400 Americans died during battle and 5,000 died because of disease. America gained Guam, Cuba, and Puerto Rico as a result of the war. 
Muckrakers were journalists who attempted to expose the evils of society and corruption. Famous muckrakers include Ida Tarbell, Lincoln Steffens, Upton Sinclair, and David G. Phillips.
Ida Tarbell published writings exposing the horrors of the Standard Oil Company.
Lincoln Steffens wrote The Shame of Cities, which exposed the corruption of municipal (city) government.
The Social Gospel is a movement in Protestantism whose goal was to improve cities. 
Settlement Houses helped poor immigrants, women, and children adjust to American life. The most famous was the Hull House founded by Jane Addams in Chicago. These houses helped inspire the social work profession.
Jane Addams was a social worker who opened one the first and most famous settlement houses - the Hull House, which was located in Chicago. It was a model for more than 400 similar institutions throughout the nation. 
The Hull House was a settlement house opened by Jane Addams in Chicago. It was a model for more than 400 similar institutions throughout the nation. It was created to help poor immigrants, women, and children adjust to American life.
Social Work came as a result of settlement houses. Mostly women held this profession because they were often excluded from other professions.
Alice Paul advocated for women’s suffrage. She was radical for her time and authored the Equal Rights Amendment. This was not passed, but was a proposed amendment to the Constitution in favor of women’s rights.
Referendum was a state-level voting reform in which final approval of laws would be provided by voters.
Robert La Follette had an idea known as the Wisconsin Experiment. He focused on income taxes, initiatives, referendums, and regulated railroads and industries.
The Triangle Shirtwaist Company Fire occurred in a factory filled with women, children, and immigrants in a ten story building. Doors were locked from the outside, people smoked around gas engines, and there were narrow hallways, resulting in the deaths of 146 workers. There was a call for reform following this event.
W.E.B. DuBois did not think that Black Americans should try to assimilate into white culture. He believed in the “talented tenth”, which was the idea that the top 10% of Black Americans should have full access to education. He also helped form the Niagara Movement in Canada, which eventually morphed into the NAACP.
The NAACP, or the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, helped challenged racial laws in the 20th century. They won the Guinn v. United States, which stated that the grandfather clause in Oklahoma was unconstitutional.
Prohibition was the banning of alcohol. The reasons for this include drunkenness, spousal abuse, industrial inefficiency. Dry laws were passed in various states and this movement gained prominence prior to WWI. The 18th amendment was passed in 1919, which outlawed alcohol, but this was eventually overturned with the 21st amendment.
The Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) formed to help promote temperance and prohibition.
Eugenics was the sterilization of certain individuals, meaning they could not reproduce. This was done to people with mental disabilities, criminals, etc.
Eugene Debs ran for president multiple times and was associated with socialism. He was one of the founding members of the Industrial Workers of the World.
The IWW (“Wobblies”), or The Industrial Workers of the World, was a popular union that often went on strike. They were lead by William Haywood and advocated for a single union for all workers and abolition of the “wage slave” system.
“Good Trusts” were defined by their ability to control an entire industry while providing good service at reasonable rates. These were to be left alone.
The Pure Food and Drug Act was passed during Theodore Roosevelt’s presidency. It created The Food and Drug Administration and required proper labels and restricted sale of certain medicines. This helped with consumer protection.
The Newlands Act was passed in 1902 by Theodore Roosevelt, and it stated that D.C. could use money from the sale of land for irrigation projects to help improve the land.
The Panic of 1907 occurred and many people placed blame on President Roosevelt. To get out of this:,JP Morgan purchased a TN Coal and iron Company because the bank that owned it was in trouble. Roosevelt promised that he would not break up the company.
Gifford Pinchot was head of the Forest Service under Theodore Roosevelt, but was later fired by William Howard Taft, which angered Roosevelt.
New Nationalism was developed by Theodore Roosevelt, and it called for an increase in the power of the federal government. It also favored individual taxes, workers compensation, tariff reduction, etc.
The Roosevelt Corollary was an extension to the Monroe Doctrine. It stated that in future financial instances, the U.S. would intervene and pay off debts, making the U.S. take a prominent role in Latin America. 
Dollar Diplomacy was when Wall Street bankers were encouraged to invest in areas of strategic concern of the U.S. This helped other countries while making money for U.S. businesses.
Pancho Villa planned a rebellion in Mexico. Initially, Wilson supported him, but he later abandoned him which angered Villa. In response, Villa killed many Americans.
General John J. Pershing was sent into Mexico by President Wilson to capture Villa, but he was ultimately unsuccessful.
Allies were a vital component of WWI. The major powers of Europe formed into competing alliances by 1914.
The Triple Entente linked Britain, France, and Russia.
The Triple Alliance united Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and Italy.
The Central Powers was another name for the Triple Alliance.
The Lusitania was an American ship that was sunk by the Germans on May 7,1915, killing 128 Americans. 
The Zimmerman Telegram was a note from German to Mexico that urged Mexico to attack the U.S. This was done because Germany wanted to distract the U.S. from getting involved in the war. In return, Germany promised that Mexico would gain back the land from the U.S. that they had lost during the Mexican-American War.
The American Expeditionary Force, or the AEF, was comprised of 2 million men who volunteered and 3 million men who were drafted to fight in the war. 
Trench Warfare was a method of fighting in which the two sides would fight in trenches dug in the ground. The area between the trenches was known as “no-man’s land”.
The Ludlow Massacre took place in Ludlow, Colorado in 1914. Workers walked out of coal mines owned by Rockefeller and they moved into tents after being evicted from company housing. State militia were sent to protect the mines, but they attacked the workers’ tent colony, killing 39 people.
“Great Migration” was the mass movement of African Americans from the south to the industrial north.
The Fourteen Points were Wilson’s plans for the post-war world. This included self-determination, no alliances, freedom of the seas, and other things that caused the war.
The Treaty of Versailles brought WWI to an end. It stated that Germany would have to pay reparations for damages to civilians and military pensions.
The League of Nations was an international organization that would oversee world affairs and prevent future wars.
Senator Henry Cabot Lodge was against the treaty. He did everything in his power to obstruct, delay, or amend the treaty. He created a series of reservation, or amendments, that would limit American obligations to the League.
Marcus Garvey was an influential African American in the 1920s that promoted black nationalism and his organization, the United Negro Improvement Association (UNIA), encouraged movement back to Africa.
The Red Scare was a crusade led by Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer against suspected communists. Thousands of Americans were arrested and many were deported.
Palmer Raids were a series of raids orchestrated by Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer and J. Edgar Hoover. They were intended to uncover large caches of weapons and explosives, but only three pistols were found.
Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were italian immigrants charged with the murder of a paymaster in Braintree, Massachusetts in May 1920. The evidence was questionable, but because of their background and the prejudiced jury, they were convicted and sentenced to death. As a result, there were widespread protests, but they were ultimately killed.
The Nineteenth Amendment was passed on August 26, 1920, and it gave women the right to vote.
A. Philip Randolph was the leader of the union The Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. He called for increased wages, shorter working hours, etc. He was also an influential civil leader. 
Alain Locke assembled a notable collection of black writings in 1925 in The New Negro. It helped to make white publishers take interest in the writers.
Al Smith was a democrat and a Roman Catholic that ran for president in 1928.
The “American Plan” was what U.S. employers in the 1920s used to describe their policy of refusing to negotiate with unions.
The Automobile expanded people’s horizons by allowing them to venture away from their homes. It was a means of escaping farm life and quickly being able to reach others. People in cities found that automobiles could take them away from the chaos of the city. It also transformed people’s ideas of vacations and made them more accessible.
Duke Ellington was a jazz musician during the Harlem Renaissance.
H. L. Mencken was a member of the Lost Generation. He wrote the magazines Smart Set and American Mercury. These criticized middle-class values.
The Harlem Renaissance promoted African American culture through poetry, music such as jazz, literature, and art. It also focused on the discrimination they face.
Herbert Hoover was the 31st president of the U.S. He served during the Great Depression and promised to restore prosperity in the country.
Issei were first generation Japanese immigrants.
Jelly Roll Morton was a jazz musician during the Harlem Renaissance.
The Ku Klux Klan re-emerged in the 1920s and focused on anti-foreignism in addition to discrimination towards African Americans. The film The Birth of a Nation was released in 1915, and it glorified the KKK. 5 million Americans paid dues as members. Scandals helped lead to the decline of the group.
Langston Hughes was a famous member of the Harlem Renaissance and summed up the movement in saying “I am a Negro- and beautiful”.
The Lost Generation was a group of writers that resented middle-class ideals and felt betrayed by society. Some examples are Ernest Hemingway and H.L. Mencken.
Margaret Sanger advocated for birth control and contraceptives because birth control was illegal in many places in the 1920s. This upset many religious fundamentalists.
The National Origins Act of 1924 strengthened the exclusionist provision of 1921. It banned immigration from east Asia entirely, which angered the Japanese. It also reduced the European quota from 3% to 2%.
Nisei Japanese naturalized or native born citizens to the U.S.
Parity held the purpose of ensuring that farmers would get back at least their production costs, but it was not very effective. It was passed by Congress, but vetoed by Coolidge.
Scopes “Monkey Trial” was when a biology teacher in Tennessee named John Scopes violated a law by teaching evolution. Scopes was found guilt and had to pay a $100 fine.
Sinclair Lewis was a novelist and the first American to receive a Nobel prize in literature.He lashed out at different aspects of modern society.
Teapot Dome was a scandal in which the Secretary of Interior Fall transferred land to his department, leased land to oil companies, and took $100,000s in bribes.
The Jazz Singer was the first talkie movie, or the first movie that had sound.
Welfare Capitalism was developed by Henry Ford, and it raised the standard of living for many workers. This included a shorter workweek, higher wages, and paid vacations.
“Black Tuesday” was the day the stock market crashed on October 29, 1929. It marked the beginning of the Great Depression.
The Dust Bowl took place in the middle portion of the U.S. It was caused by drought, wind, and human cultivation of the land. There were huge dust storms that ruined land.
“Okies” were families that moved from the Dust Bowl area to other areas, and California was where many migrated to.
The Scottsboro Case was a case in which 9 African Americans were accused of rape. An all-white jury found them guilty and 8 of them were sentenced to death However, they were all released from jail many years later.
John Steinbeck was a writer during the Great Depression. He wrote a book called The Grapes of Wrath, which was about the Dust Bowl.
Clifford Odets was a playwright that wrote Waiting for Lefty. It demonstrated the appeal of political radicalism.
Frank Capra was a director who provided a social message in his comedies.
Orson Welles broadcast what was known as “War of the Worlds” on the radio in 1938. It was about aliens landing in the U.S., and many people believed it to be real.
Soap Operas were listened to via the radio and were a great source of entertainment for people.
Life Magazine was a highly successful magazine that was known for it pictures of events, landscapes, and public projects.
The Agricultural Marketing Act was a program created by Hoover that was meant to help farmers maintain prices.
The Tariff Act of 1930, also known as the Hawley-Smoot Tariff, was a high tariff. It led to high European tariffs in return. It discouraged foreign trade.
Hoovervilles were places where people built houses out of cardboard, tin, etc. because they were homeless. They were named after President Herbert Hoover.
The Reconstruction Finance Corporation was created under Hoover, and it was meant to provide loans to banks, railroad companies, and businesses. However, it was a failure because it could not provide enough money.
The Bonus Army was made up of WWI veterans that demanded their promised bonuses. They went to Washington D.C. in hope of receiving their bonuses, but were eventually broken up.
“Bank Holiday” was when FDR closed all banks for days to calm Americans’ fears.
The Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) paid farmers not to grow crops because there was too much supply. It was declared unconstitutional in Butler v. U.S.
The National Recovery Administration (NRA) set minimum wages and maximum hours to spread employment. This gave rights to labor unions.
The Schechter Brothers Case declared to NRA unconstitutional because legislative powers could not be delegated to the president.
The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) provided hydroelectric power within the Tennessee valley. It helped reform monopolies and provide jobs. It also encouraged use of hydroelectric power in other areas.
The Glass-Steagall Act set up the FDIC, which guaranteed individual banking deposits.
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulated the stock market.
Francis E. Townsend appealed to senior citizens. He created a plan for pension for individuals over 60. They would receive $200 a month if they spent the money within 30 days.
Charles E. Coughlin had a very large radio audience, and he wanted to change the American banking system.
Huey Long was a senator and governor from Louisiana. He promoted “sharing the wealth”, meaning that individuals would receive money by taxing the wealthy. This would redistribute money.
The Social Security Act provided federal-state unemployment insurance and money for senior citizens, the disabled, etc. It was created by collecting a new payroll tax.
The Court-Packing Plan was proposed by FDR because he wanted a court in favor of his programs. It proposed that a new supreme court judge could be added for every judge over 70. After this, the court began to rule more in favor of his programs.
Eleanor Roosevelt was the first lady under FDR. She fought for racial equality and justice.
Marian Anderson was an African American concert singer that was refused permission in the spring of 1939 to give a concert in the auditorium of the Daughters of the American Revolution.
Frances Perkins was the Secretary of Labor, and she became the first female cabinet member.

Pd. 8
The Yalta Conference took place after World War I, and it was the last meeting between the three major leaders (Churchill, FDR, and Stalin). Stalin agreed to free elections in Eastern Europe and promised elections in Poland, which was never met. He also agreed that the USSR would join the UN. Germany would also be divided into 4 different zones.
Mao Zedong led the communists in the Chinese Civil War.
Containment was a philosophy created by George Kennan. He believed that the threat of the expansion of communism should be contained. The two forms of containment were the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan.
George F. Kennan was an influential American diplomat. He established the idea of containment.
The Truman Doctrine was a form of containment that gave $480 million in aid to Turkey and Greece.
The Marshall Plan was another form of containment that provided $12 billion in economic aid to Europe. The purpose was to rebuild the economies so that communism would not seem as appealing.
The National Security Act created the Department of Defense, the CIA, and increased the powers of the president.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was an alliance in which the 12 nations involved (U.S. and western Europe) agreed to defend each other. They declared that an attack on one member was an attack on all.
The Warsaw Pact was an alliance created by the Soviet Union in 1955 in response to NATO that involved the communist nations in eastern Europe.
NSC-68 urged a more aggressive foreign policy and increased defense spending.
The Fair Deal was a twenty-one point domestic program created by Truman. It proposed an expansion of social security benefits, higher minimum wage, public housing, national health insurance, etc. The biggest success was raising the minimum wage and housing.
The Taft-Hartley Act limited the power of unions. It made closed shops illegal, which required businesses to only hire union members. It was an assault on the Wagner Act of 1935.
The Korean War began in 1950 when North Korea (Communist) invaded South Korea (not Communist). They took over almost all of South Korea, so Truman viewed this as an act of the Soviet Union. In response, the U.S. increased its military size and spending. N. Korea pushed past the 38th parallel. China intervened and helped N. Korea. In July 1953, it was agreed that Korea would be divided at the 38th parallel, which would be a demilitarized zone.
Douglas MacArthur wanted to fight a large-scale war and attack the Chinese. He criticized Truman’s plans, so he is later fired.
The House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) held widely publicized investigations to prove that, under Democratic rule, the government had tolerated communist subversion.